Training/Azure-Sentinel-Training-Lab/README.md, before:

# Welcome to Microsoft Sentinel Training Lab

<p align="center">
<img src="./Images/sentinel-labs-logo.png?raw=true">
</p>

## Introduction
These labs help you get ramped up with Microsoft Sentinel and provide hands-on practical experience for product features, capabilities, and scenarios. 

The lab deploys a Microsoft Sentinel workspace and ingests pre-recorded data to simulate scenarios that showcase various Microsoft Sentinel features. You should expect very little or no cost at all due to the size of the data (~10 MB), and the fact that Microsoft Sentinel offers a 30-day free trial on new workspaces.

## Prerequisites

Before you begin, make sure you have:

1. **Azure subscription** — If you don't have one, create a [free account](https://azure.microsoft.com/pricing/purchase-options/azure-account).
2. **Owner or Contributor role** on the target resource group (needed to create resources and assign RBAC roles during deployment).
3. **Microsoft Sentinel workspace onboarded to Microsoft Defender XDR** — The Log Analytics workspace must be connected to the [unified security operations platform (Defender XDR)](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/sentinel/microsoft-sentinel-defender-portal) and set as the **primary workspace**. The [Onboarding exercise](./Exercises/Onboarding.md) walks you through this step by step.
4. **For the best experience**, enable [Microsoft Sentinel Data Lake](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/sentinel/data-lake) on your workspace. This allows long-term, low-cost retention of security data and enables advanced hunting over extended time ranges.

## Custom Detection Rules Setup

This lab deploys **custom detection rules** to Microsoft Defender XDR via the Microsoft Graph Security API. The Automation runbook that creates the rules needs an identity with the `CustomDetection.ReadWrite.All` Microsoft Graph application permission. You can use **either** a User-Assigned Managed Identity (UAMI) **or** a Service Principal (App Registration) — pick the option that suits your environment.

> **Tip:** Leave all identity fields empty during deployment if you want to skip custom detection rules entirely.

Complete **one** of the two options below before deployment.

---

### Option A — User-Assigned Managed Identity (UAMI)

#### A1. Create the UAMI

```powershell
# Create the UAMI (adjust resource group and name as needed)
az identity create `
  --resource-group <your-resource-group> `
  --name SentinelDetectionRulesIdentity
```

#### A2. Grant the Microsoft Graph permission

```powershell
# Variables
$miObjectId   = (az identity show --resource-group <your-resource-group> --name SentinelDetectionRulesIdentity --query principalId -o tsv)
$graphAppId   = "00000003-0000-0000-c000-000000000000"   # Microsoft Graph
$appRoleId    = "e0fd9c8d-a12e-4cc9-9827-20c8c3cd6fb8"   # CustomDetection.ReadWrite.All

# Get the Microsoft Graph service principal
$graphSpId = (az ad sp show --id $graphAppId --query id -o tsv)

# Assign the app role to the managed identity
az rest --method POST `
  --uri "https://graph.microsoft.com/v1.0/servicePrincipals/$graphSpId/appRoleAssignedTo" `
  --headers "Content-Type=application/json" `
  --body "{\"principalId\":\"$miObjectId\",\"resourceId\":\"$graphSpId\",\"appRoleId\":\"$appRoleId\"}"
```

#### A3. Deploy

Pass the UAMI's **full resource ID** as the `detectionRulesIdentityResourceId` parameter when deploying (in [Onboarding Exercise 8](./Exercises/Onboarding.md#exercise-8-deploy-the-microsoft-sentinel-training-lab-solution)):

```
/subscriptions/{subscriptionId}/resourceGroups/{resourceGroup}/providers/Microsoft.ManagedIdentity/userAssignedIdentities/SentinelDetectionRulesIdentity
```

---

### Option B — Service Principal (App Registration)

Use this option when you cannot create or use a Managed Identity (e.g., cross-tenant deployments or restricted RBAC environments).

**Prefer the portal?** You can complete steps B1–B3 entirely from the Azure portal by following [Create a Microsoft Entra app and service principal in the portal](https://learn.microsoft.com/entra/identity-platform/howto-create-service-principal-portal). That guide covers app registration, API permission assignment (use **Microsoft Graph → Application permissions → CustomDetection.ReadWrite.All**), and client secret creation. Once done, skip ahead to **B4** below.

<p align="center">
<img src="./Images/OnboardingImage8.png?raw=true">
</p>

#### B1. Create an App Registration

```powershell
# Create the app registration
az ad app create --display-name SentinelDetectionRulesSPN

# Note the appId (client ID) from the output
$appId = (az ad app list --display-name SentinelDetectionRulesSPN --query "[0].appId" -o tsv)

# Create a service principal for the app
az ad sp create --id $appId
```

#### B2. Grant the Microsoft Graph permission

```powershell
$spObjectId   = (az ad sp show --id $appId --query id -o tsv)
$graphAppId   = "00000003-0000-0000-c000-000000000000"   # Microsoft Graph
$appRoleId    = "e0fd9c8d-a12e-4cc9-9827-20c8c3cd6fb8"   # CustomDetection.ReadWrite.All

$graphSpId = (az ad sp show --id $graphAppId --query id -o tsv)

az rest --method POST `
  --uri "https://graph.microsoft.com/v1.0/servicePrincipals/$graphSpId/appRoleAssignedTo" `
  --headers "Content-Type=application/json" `
  --body "{\"principalId\":\"$spObjectId\",\"resourceId\":\"$graphSpId\",\"appRoleId\":\"$appRoleId\"}"
```

> **Note:** Granting application permissions requires **Global Administrator** or **Privileged Role Administrator** in Microsoft Entra ID, or admin consent must be granted afterwards.

#### B3. Create a client secret

```powershell
az ad app credential reset --id $appId --append
# Save the "password" value — it will not be shown again.
```

#### B4. Deploy

During deployment, provide the following three parameters (leave the UAMI field empty):

| Parameter | Value |
|---|---|
| `detectionRulesSpnTenantId` | Your Microsoft Entra **Tenant ID** |
| `detectionRulesSpnClientId` | The **Application (client) ID** from step B1 |
| `detectionRulesSpnClientSecret` | The **client secret** from step B3 |

## Getting started

Start with the **Onboarding** exercise to set up your workspace, install solutions, and deploy the lab. Then work through Exercises 1–6 in order — each builds on the previous one.

## Exercises

[**Onboarding — Setting up the environment**](./Exercises/Onboarding.md)
- Create a Log Analytics workspace and onboard Microsoft Sentinel
- Install Content Hub solutions and set up data connectors
- Deploy the Training Lab solution

[**Exercise 1 — Threat Intel IOC Matching**](./Exercises/E01_threat_intel_ioc_matching.md)

[**Exercise 2 — Port Scan Threshold Tuning**](./Exercises/E02_port_scan_threshold_tuning.md)

[**Exercise 3 — Okta MFA Manipulation**](./Exercises/E03_okta_mfa_manipulation.md)

[**Exercise 4 — Watchlist Integration**](./Exercises/E04_watchlist_integration.md)

[**Exercise 5 — Device Isolation Response**](./Exercises/E05_device_isolation_response.md)

[**Exercise 6 — Data Lake KQL Jobs**](./Exercises/E06_datalake_kql_jobs.md)

[**Exercise 7 — Data Lake Port Diversity**](./Exercises/E07_datalake_port_diversity.md)

[**Exercise 8 — Table Management: Tiers & Retention**](./Exercises/E08_table_management.md)

[**Exercise 9 — Sentinel MCP Server Demo Prompts**](./Exercises/E09_MCP.md)

[**Exercise 10 — Data Lake Notebooks**](./Exercises/E10_notebooks.md)

---

## Reference

> **Optional — Exercise 5 (Device Isolation Response):** This exercise requires a machine onboarded to **Microsoft Defender for Endpoint (MDE)**. If you plan to complete Exercise 5, onboard a test device to MDE before starting. See [Onboard devices to Microsoft Defender for Endpoint](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/defender-endpoint/onboarding) for instructions.

### Release notes

* Version 1.0 - Microsoft Sentinel Training Lab

Commit message:

fix: comprehensive repo scan — broken links, missing rules, stale references
- Fix broken links: Onboarding.md -> E01, E01 -> E04 (zero-pad filenames)
- Fix E05 stale self-references: E6 -> E5 (2 occurrences)
- Add missing rules to rules.json: E5 (Device Isolation), E7 (Port Diversity)
- Set E1 isEnabled to false (exercise rules should be disabled by default)
- Fix E01 table mismatch: SEG_MailGuard_CL -> MailGuard365_Threats_CL
- Fix E1 rule description: remove phantom indicators.json reference
- Update README: exercise guidance now covers all 10 exercises
- Replace phantom detections/rules/ file paths with Artifacts/DetectionRules/rules.json
- Replace phantom python -m scripts.* commands with actual PowerShell scripts
- Fix E01 broken threat-intelligence/indicators.json reference
- Add explicit E06 prerequisite to E07

Training/Azure-Sentinel-Training-Lab/README.md, after:

# Welcome to Microsoft Sentinel Training Lab

<p align="center">
<img src="./Images/sentinel-labs-logo.png?raw=true">
</p>

## Introduction
These labs help you get ramped up with Microsoft Sentinel and provide hands-on practical experience for product features, capabilities, and scenarios. 

The lab deploys a Microsoft Sentinel workspace and ingests pre-recorded data to simulate scenarios that showcase various Microsoft Sentinel features. You should expect very little or no cost at all due to the size of the data (~10 MB), and the fact that Microsoft Sentinel offers a 30-day free trial on new workspaces.

## Prerequisites

Before you begin, make sure you have:

1. **Azure subscription** — If you don't have one, create a [free account](https://azure.microsoft.com/pricing/purchase-options/azure-account).
2. **Owner or Contributor role** on the target resource group (needed to create resources and assign RBAC roles during deployment).
3. **Microsoft Sentinel workspace onboarded to Microsoft Defender XDR** — The Log Analytics workspace must be connected to the [unified security operations platform (Defender XDR)](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/sentinel/microsoft-sentinel-defender-portal) and set as the **primary workspace**. The [Onboarding exercise](./Exercises/Onboarding.md) walks you through this step by step.
4. **For the best experience**, enable [Microsoft Sentinel Data Lake](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/sentinel/data-lake) on your workspace. This allows long-term, low-cost retention of security data and enables advanced hunting over extended time ranges.

## Custom Detection Rules Setup

This lab deploys **custom detection rules** to Microsoft Defender XDR via the Microsoft Graph Security API. The Automation runbook that creates the rules needs an identity with the `CustomDetection.ReadWrite.All` Microsoft Graph application permission. You can use **either** a User-Assigned Managed Identity (UAMI) **or** a Service Principal (App Registration) — pick the option that suits your environment.

> **Tip:** Leave all identity fields empty during deployment if you want to skip custom detection rules entirely.

Complete **one** of the two options below before deployment.

---

### Option A — User-Assigned Managed Identity (UAMI)

#### A1. Create the UAMI

```powershell
# Create the UAMI (adjust resource group and name as needed)
az identity create `
  --resource-group <your-resource-group> `
  --name SentinelDetectionRulesIdentity
```

#### A2. Grant the Microsoft Graph permission

```powershell
# Variables
$miObjectId   = (az identity show --resource-group <your-resource-group> --name SentinelDetectionRulesIdentity --query principalId -o tsv)
$graphAppId   = "00000003-0000-0000-c000-000000000000"   # Microsoft Graph
$appRoleId    = "e0fd9c8d-a12e-4cc9-9827-20c8c3cd6fb8"   # CustomDetection.ReadWrite.All

# Get the Microsoft Graph service principal
$graphSpId = (az ad sp show --id $graphAppId --query id -o tsv)

# Assign the app role to the managed identity
az rest --method POST `
  --uri "https://graph.microsoft.com/v1.0/servicePrincipals/$graphSpId/appRoleAssignedTo" `
  --headers "Content-Type=application/json" `
  --body "{\"principalId\":\"$miObjectId\",\"resourceId\":\"$graphSpId\",\"appRoleId\":\"$appRoleId\"}"
```

#### A3. Deploy

Pass the UAMI's **full resource ID** as the `detectionRulesIdentityResourceId` parameter when deploying (in [Onboarding Exercise 8](./Exercises/Onboarding.md#exercise-8-deploy-the-microsoft-sentinel-training-lab-solution)):

```
/subscriptions/{subscriptionId}/resourceGroups/{resourceGroup}/providers/Microsoft.ManagedIdentity/userAssignedIdentities/SentinelDetectionRulesIdentity
```

---

### Option B — Service Principal (App Registration)

Use this option when you cannot create or use a Managed Identity (e.g., cross-tenant deployments or restricted RBAC environments).

**Prefer the portal?** You can complete steps B1–B3 entirely from the Azure portal by following [Create a Microsoft Entra app and service principal in the portal](https://learn.microsoft.com/entra/identity-platform/howto-create-service-principal-portal). That guide covers app registration, API permission assignment (use **Microsoft Graph → Application permissions → CustomDetection.ReadWrite.All**), and client secret creation. Once done, skip ahead to **B4** below.

<p align="center">
<img src="./Images/OnboardingImage8.png?raw=true">
</p>

#### B1. Create an App Registration

```powershell
# Create the app registration
az ad app create --display-name SentinelDetectionRulesSPN

# Note the appId (client ID) from the output
$appId = (az ad app list --display-name SentinelDetectionRulesSPN --query "[0].appId" -o tsv)

# Create a service principal for the app
az ad sp create --id $appId
```

#### B2. Grant the Microsoft Graph permission

```powershell
$spObjectId   = (az ad sp show --id $appId --query id -o tsv)
$graphAppId   = "00000003-0000-0000-c000-000000000000"   # Microsoft Graph
$appRoleId    = "e0fd9c8d-a12e-4cc9-9827-20c8c3cd6fb8"   # CustomDetection.ReadWrite.All

$graphSpId = (az ad sp show --id $graphAppId --query id -o tsv)

az rest --method POST `
  --uri "https://graph.microsoft.com/v1.0/servicePrincipals/$graphSpId/appRoleAssignedTo" `
  --headers "Content-Type=application/json" `
  --body "{\"principalId\":\"$spObjectId\",\"resourceId\":\"$graphSpId\",\"appRoleId\":\"$appRoleId\"}"
```

> **Note:** Granting application permissions requires **Global Administrator** or **Privileged Role Administrator** in Microsoft Entra ID, or admin consent must be granted afterwards.

#### B3. Create a client secret

```powershell
az ad app credential reset --id $appId --append
# Save the "password" value — it will not be shown again.
```

#### B4. Deploy

During deployment, provide the following three parameters (leave the UAMI field empty):

| Parameter | Value |
|---|---|
| `detectionRulesSpnTenantId` | Your Microsoft Entra **Tenant ID** |
| `detectionRulesSpnClientId` | The **Application (client) ID** from step B1 |
| `detectionRulesSpnClientSecret` | The **client secret** from step B3 |

## Getting started

Start with the **Onboarding** exercise to set up your workspace, install solutions, and deploy the lab. Then work through the exercises below. Exercises 1–4 are standalone and can be done in any order. Exercise 5 is optional (requires MDE). Exercises 6–8 should be done in sequence. Exercises 9–10 are independent demos.

## Exercises

[**Onboarding — Setting up the environment**](./Exercises/Onboarding.md)
- Create a Log Analytics workspace and onboard Microsoft Sentinel
- Install Content Hub solutions and set up data connectors
- Deploy the Training Lab solution

[**Exercise 1 — Threat Intel IOC Matching**](./Exercises/E01_threat_intel_ioc_matching.md)

[**Exercise 2 — Port Scan Threshold Tuning**](./Exercises/E02_port_scan_threshold_tuning.md)

[**Exercise 3 — Okta MFA Manipulation**](./Exercises/E03_okta_mfa_manipulation.md)

[**Exercise 4 — Watchlist Integration**](./Exercises/E04_watchlist_integration.md)

[**Exercise 5 — Device Isolation Response**](./Exercises/E05_device_isolation_response.md)

[**Exercise 6 — Data Lake KQL Jobs**](./Exercises/E06_datalake_kql_jobs.md)

[**Exercise 7 — Data Lake Port Diversity**](./Exercises/E07_datalake_port_diversity.md)

[**Exercise 8 — Table Management: Tiers & Retention**](./Exercises/E08_table_management.md)

[**Exercise 9 — Sentinel MCP Server Demo Prompts**](./Exercises/E09_MCP.md)

[**Exercise 10 — Data Lake Notebooks**](./Exercises/E10_notebooks.md)

---

## Reference

> **Optional — Exercise 5 (Device Isolation Response):** This exercise requires a machine onboarded to **Microsoft Defender for Endpoint (MDE)**. If you plan to complete Exercise 5, onboard a test device to MDE before starting. See [Onboard devices to Microsoft Defender for Endpoint](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/defender-endpoint/onboarding) for instructions.

### Release notes

* Version 1.0 - Microsoft Sentinel Training Lab
